Among the express verbal testimonies of the New Testament, we must first
consider the declarations of the Lord Himself; and among these the passage
John viii. 44 requires, above all, to be examined. In that passage the Lord
says: ὑμεῖς ἐκ τοῦ πατρὸς τοῦ διαβόλου ἐστὲ, καὶ τὰς ἐπιθυμίας τοῦ πατρὸς ὑμῶν
θέλετε ποιεῖν. Ἑκεῖνος ἀνθρωποκτόνος ἦν ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς, καὶ ἐν τῆ ἀληθείᾳ οὐχ
ἕστηκεν· ὅτι οὐκ ἔστιν ἀλήθεια ἐν αὐτῷ. Ὅταν λαλῇ τὸ ψεῦδος, ἐκ τῶν ἰδίων
λαλεῖ· ὅτι ψεύστης ἐστὶ καὶ ὁ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ. There is, indeed, an element of
truth in the opinion, that Satan is in this passage called the murderer of men
from the beginning, with reference to the murder by Cain—an opinion lately
brought forward again by Nitzsch, Lücke, and others. This is evident from a
comparison of 1 John iii. 12, 15, and of Rev. xii. 3. (See my commentary on
this passage.) Moreover, the words in ver. 40, "Ye seek to kill Me," have a
more direct parallelism in Cain's murder of his brother, than in the death
which Satan brought upon our first parents; although it is altogether wrong to
maintain, as Lücke does, that Satan at that time committed only a spiritual
murder, which could not have come under notice. Bodily death also came upon
mankind through the temptation. (Compare Gen. ii. 17, iii. 19; Wisd.
ii. 24; Rom. v. 12.) But when the reference to Cain's slaying his brother is
brought forward as the sole, or even as the principal one, we must absolutely
reject it. Cain's murder of his brother comes into consideration only as an
effect of the evil principle which was introduced into human nature by the
first temptation; as, indeed, it appears in the book of Genesis itself as the
fruit of the poisonous tree, the planting of which is detailed in chap. iii.
The same murderous spirit which impelled Satan to bring man under the dominion
of death by the lie, "Ye shall not surely die," was busy in Cain also, and
seduced him to slay his pious brother. The following reasons forbid an
exclusive reference to the deed of Cain:—1. The murdering of man by Satan is
brought into the closest connection with his lie. In connection with Cain's
deed, however, there was not even the appearance of falsehood; while, in the
case before us, lies, false and deceitful promises of high blessings to be
attained, and the raising of suspicions against God, were the very means by
which he seduced man, and brought him under the power of sin. The words of
Jesus, when they are understood according to their simple meaning, carry us
back to an event in the primitive times, in which murder and the spirit of
falsehood went hand in hand. 2. The co-operation of Satan in Cain's deed is
not expressly mentioned in Genesis. That there was any such we can with
certainty infer, only if this event be viewed in close connection with what
Satan did against our first parents,—if, behind the serpent, Satan be
concealed. Whensoever Jesus has to deal with Jews, He does not teach any
mysterious doctrines, but makes an open appeal to the events narrated in
Scripture. 3. The words, "Ye are of your father the devil," point to the seed
of the serpent spoken of in Gen. iii. 15. 4. The words, "From the beginning,"
direct to an event which happened at the first beginnings of mankind, and in
which our first parents took a part. Whatever this may be, the event in
question must be the first in which the devil manifested himself as the
murderer of man. Now, as by the Jews of that time the temptation of the first
man, in consequence of which death entered the world, was attributed to
sin—and this appears not only from what has been already said, but also from a
passage in the Sohar Chadash, referred to by Tholuck, in which the wicked are
called "The children of the old serpent which has slain Adam and all
who are descended from him"—it is evident that, by "the murderer of men from
the beginning," Jesus can mean only the first tempter of men. That the words,
"from the beginning," refer to the fall of the first man, is also clearly
shown by the parallel passages 1 John iii. 8, and Rev. xii. 9, xx. 2. 5. Jesus
says: Satan stands not in the truth, does not move in its element, because
there is no truth in him. This points to a well-known event, in which Satan
displayed his lying nature; and such is found only in the account of man's
fall. 6. Jesus calls Satan not only a liar, but, by way of emphasis, He
designates him as the father of lies. But Satan can be designated thus, only
with reference to a lie of his which is charged against him by Scripture, and
which preceded all lies on earth. Now that is the lie of which we have an
account in Gen. iii. 4, 5. The words, "and the father of it," correspond with
the words, "from the beginning."
